---
layout: home
permalink: /introduction
title: "Introduction"
excerpt: "<br>"
image:
  feature: /banners/04_banner.jpg
toc: true
---
{% include toc.html class="toc-left" h_min=2 h_max=2 %} 

Our understanding of fish ecology and ability to manage populations require accurate data on species occurrence, abundance, body-size distribution and behaviour. Remote video-based sampling methods are increasingly being adopted due to: (i) their non-destructive nature, (ii) ability to sample rare species (Harvey _et al._ 2018; Goetze _et al._ 2019), over broad depth ranges (Heyns-Veale _et al._ 2016; Wellington _et al._ 2018), (iii) provision of a permanent record that can be reviewed to reduce interobserver variability (Cappo _et al._ 2009), (iv) ability to collect concomitant data on habitat (Bennett _et al._ 2016; e.g. epibenthic cover and substrate, Collins _et al._ 2017), and (v) provision of images for science communication. Remote underwater video sampling methods are not subject to diver safety restrictions, nor do they suffer from the behavioural biases resulting from diver presence (Lindfield _et al._ 2014; Gray _et al._ 2016). Multiple remote systems can be deployed in the field consecutively to make efficient use of field time and enable spatially-extensive sampling (Langlois _et al._ 2012c).

The use of bait with remote underwater video (BRUV) systems increases the relative abundance and diversity of fishes observed, particularly species targeted by fisheries, without precluding the sampling of fishes not attracted to bait (Harvey _et al._ 2007; Coghlan _et al._ 2017; Speed _et al._ 2019). Biases associated with bait use have been discussed in various studies (Dorman, Harvey & Newman 2012; Hardinge _et al._ 2013; Goetze _et al._ 2015; Coghlan _et al._ 2017). Variation in bait plume dispersal and the sensitivity of different fish species to bait is unknown (Harvey _et al._ 2007), and likely species-specific, with cryptic and sedentary species potentially under-represented (Watson _et al._ 2005; Stat _et al._ 2019). Despite these limitations, BRUVs have been shown to provide relative measures of species richness and abundance for a range of species in a diverse array of conditions and habitats (Cappo, Harvey & Shortis 2006).

BRUV systems with stereo-video cameras (stereo-BRUVs) enable precise measurements of body size (Harvey, Fletcher & Shortis 2001), which surpass estimates made by divers (Harvey _et al._ 2001). Both length and biomass distribution data are recognised as essential metrics for biodiversity conservation and fisheries management reporting (Langlois, Harvey & Meeuwig 2012b). Importantly, stereo-BRUVs provide comparable body-size distribution data to fisheries-dependent methods such as trawls (Cappo, Speare & De’ath 2004), hook and line (Langlois _et al._ 2012a), and trap fishing (Langlois _et al._ 2015). Despite being considered unsuitable for estimating density, stereo-BRUVs provide a cost-effective and statistically powerful method to detect spatio-temporal changes in the relative abundance, length, and biomass distribution of fish assemblages (Harvey _et al._ 2013; Malcolm _et al._ 2015; Bornt _et al._ 2015). However, in over 260 studies using stereo-BRUVS for a range of objectives (Supp 1), Whitmarsh, Fairweather & Huveneers (2017) found widespread variation in methodology, which may prevent interoperability of the data. 

We provide a widely accepted protocol for the use of benthic stereo-BRUVs including information on design, field operation, image annotation, data validation, archiving and synthesis. By providing a standardised protocol for stereo-BRUV surveys, we aim to reduce variation in methodologies among researchers, and encourage the use of Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reproducible (FAIR, Wilkinson _et al._ 2016) workflows to increase the ability to synthesise datasets and answer broad-scale ecological questions.
